GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: reshaping
America's child care policies.
As Donald Trump lays out his
plan, we take
a look at how the candidates
compare on the
issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
endgame strategy -- what the
candidates must
do to reach the 270 electoral
votes needed
to win.
GWEN IFILL: And in the first of
our two-part
series, how American women are
falling victim
to forced marriage, with no
clear system to
protect them.
NINA VAN HARN, Michigan: I do
remember being
very nervous, and yet knowing
that I needed
to be smiling and I was supposed
to be happy.
And I just looked in the mirror
and I thought,
this is it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus: turning
down the volume
on sound pollution.
One company makes strides to
protect marine
life from manmade noise in the
ocean.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: For Donald Trump
and Hillary
Clinton, this day has been all
about health.
It included releases of medical
data, to varying
degrees, and a journey to a
Michigan city
beset by a water crisis.
It was Donald Trump's first trip
to Flint
since the city found lead in its
water in
2014.
The Republican nominee made a
quick visit
to a water plant and a local
church.
But as Trump turned to
criticizing his opponent,
the minister interrupted:
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Hillary failed on the economy,
just like she
has failed on foreign policy.
Everything she touched didn't
work out.
Nothing.
Now, Hillary Clinton...
WOMAN: Mr. Trump, I invited you
here to thank
us for...
DONALD TRUMP: Oh, oh, oh, OK,
OK.
WOMAN: Not to give a political
speech.
DONALD TRUMP: OK.
That's good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump was also
heckled, but
he promised quick relief for
Flint, if he's
elected.
Word of his coming, though,
wasn't well-received
by Democratic Mayor Karen
Weaver, who backs
Hillary Clinton.
She said: "Flint is focused on
fixing the
problems caused by lead
contamination of our
drinking water, not photo-ops."
Earlier, Trump taped an
interview with "The
Dr. Oz Show," and gave the host
of a one-page
summary of a medical exam he had
last week.
The campaign declined to say
what was in summary.
The interview airs tomorrow.
Clinton is expected to resume
campaigning
tomorrow, after a bout with
pneumonia.
Late today, her aides released
an overall
medical update from Clinton's
physician.
It said she continues taking
medication to
control a previously known
thyroid condition
and blood clots.
Otherwise, the doctor found her
in sound health.
Today, her husband, former
President Bill
Clinton, carried her cause to
Las Vegas.
BILL CLINTON, Former President
of the United
States: We need to get over all
these crazy
divisions and go into the future
together.
That's Hillary's position.
That's what stronger together
means.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, both
major party
nominees, especially Trump, came
in for stinging
criticism from former Secretary
of State Colin
Powell in personal e-mails
stolen by hackers
and leaked to BuzzFeed.
In one, Powell called Trump --
quote -- "a
national disgrace and an
international pariah."
And about Hillary Clinton, he
said: "Everything
HRC touches, she kind of screws
up with hubris."
And on the foundation front,
former President
Clinton and daughter Chelsea
will leave the
board of a health group
connected to the Clinton
Foundation if Hillary Clinton is
elected.
And the state attorney general
in New York
is now investigating whether
Donald Trump's
foundation violated state laws
on nonprofits.
We will return to the state of
the presidential
race later in the program.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: The U.S.
signed a record aid agreement
with Israel
worth $38 billion over 10 years.
The ceremony took place at the
State Department.
National security adviser Susan
Rice called
it a reminder of America's
unshakable commitment
to Israel.
SUSAN RICE, U.S. National
Security Adviser:
This marks a significant
increase over our
existing funding, and it will
ensure that
Israel has the support it needs
to defend
itself, by itself, and to
preserve its qualitative
military edge.
This is the single largest
pledge of military
assistance to any country in us
history.
GWEN IFILL: The agreement came
in spite of
strained relations with Israel
over the Iran
nuclear deal and other issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former Israeli
President Shimon
Peres is slightly improved
tonight, 24 hours
after a major stroke.
His doctor says the Nobel Peace
Prize winner
has regained consciousness, and
reacts to
stimulation.
Peres is 93 years old.
GWEN IFILL: The cease-fire in
Syria still
appears to be holding, but
humanitarian aid
is largely stalled.
Turkey's ruling party did send a
pair of aid
trucks to a Syrian border town
today.
They carried food and children's
toys.
But two United Nations convoys
bound for Aleppo
remained stuck, despite pleas
from the secretary-general.
BAN KI-MOON, United Nations
Secretary-General:
It is crucially important that
the necessary
arrangements, security
arrangements, should
be given, so that they can be
allowed to cross
the lines.
We are working very hard.
We are very much committed.
GWEN IFILL: The cease-fire is
due to run through
Sunday, but the U.S. and Russia
agreed today
to extend it another two days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In China,
authorities have
cracked down on a village known
for grassroots
public demonstrations.
The raids began early Tuesday,
after new protests
in Wukan over the arrest of a
local chief.
Residents say police descended
on the village,
firing rubber bullets and tear
gas, as villagers
hurled rocks back at them.
GWEN IFILL: A supertyphoon
battered Taiwan
today, with winds topping 140
miles an hour.
It's the strongest storm
anywhere in the world
this year.
The powerful wind and heavy rain
knocked out
power to more than
half-a-million homes and
shut down air and train travel.
Meanwhile, Tropical Storm Julia
dumped rain
along the Southeastern U.S.
coast.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.S. soldier
Chelsea Manning
has ended a hunger strike in
prison, after
the Army agreed for gender
transition surgery.
In a statement, Manning welcomed
the move,
and said -- quote -- "This is
all I wanted,
for them to let me be me."
In 2013, then-Private Bradley
Manning got
35 years for passing secrets to
WikiLeaks.
Later, she announced that she
identifies as
a woman.
GWEN IFILL: The Atlantic Coast
Conference
joined the NCAA today in pulling
its championships
from North Carolina.
It cited a state law limiting
protections
for transgender people and
others.
But the Republican leader of the
statehouse
insisted he won't back down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A major merger
may be on the
way.
Germany's Bayer AG offered $66
billion for
Monsanto today, and the U.S.
seed maker accepted.
They would control a quarter of
the world
market for seeds and pesticides.
It's subject to approval from
shareholders
and regulators.
GWEN IFILL: And on Wall Street,
the Dow Jones
industrial average lost nearly
32 points to
close at 18034.
The Nasdaq rose 18 points, and
the S&P 500
dropped a point.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the differences
between Donald Trump and Hillary
Clinton when
it comes to child care; the road
to 270, how
each candidate could win the
Electoral College;
forced marriage here in the
United States;
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Child care is one
of the biggest
expenses many American families
face, surpassing
the cost of college tuition and
rent in more
than 30 states.
When it comes to providing paid
family leave,
the U.S. lags behind every other
developed
country in the world.
It's a cause long championed by
Democrats.
And now the Republican nominee
for president
is out with a new plan that
seems to break
with conservative orthodoxy.
Correspondent Lisa Desjardins
reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: The two who
would be president
of all are focused on the very
youngest Americans,
our children.
Outside of Philadelphia Tuesday
night, Donald
Trump became the first GOP
nominee to propose
paid family leave and child care
help.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We need working mothers to be
fairly compensated
for their work, and have access
to affordable,
quality child care for their
kids.
LISA DESJARDINS: How would Trump
provide that
access and care?
First, Trump would push for
mothers, but not
fathers, to receive six weeks of
paid maternity
leave.
Then, he proposes that child
care costs be
fully deductible for families
making less
than $500,000 a year.
Total cost is not clear, but
Trump says he
would pay for this all by
cracking down on
unemployment insurance fraud.
The family friendly turn is
family-generated.
Trump's daughter Ivanka helped
craft the policy,
and today charged the Democratic
nominee has
failed.
IVANKA TRUMP, Daughter of Donald
Trump: Hillary
Clinton has been around for
decades and there's
no policy benefiting either
mothers or fathers
in terms of paid leave.
LISA DESJARDINS: Ron Haskins is
director of
the Center on Children and
Families at the
Brookings Institution.
RON HASKINS, Director, Center on
Children
and Families, Brookings
Institution: I think
it's quite a big deal for
Republicans.
Republicans have not been noted
for making
parental leave proposals.
But it is at least somewhat
surprising.
I would even call it quite
surprising that
Trump would make a proposal like
this.
It wouldn't get much support, I
think, in
a Republican Congress.
LISA DESJARDINS: Now to Hillary
Clinton, who
has stressed childhood issues
for decades.
What's her plan?
All parents would get 12 weeks
of paid leave.
Child care costs would be kept
to 10 percent
of the family's income for most
families,
though Clinton hasn't shown
exactly how she'd
achieve that.
And she'd pay for it all by
raising taxes
on the wealthy.
Clinton would also use those
taxes to make
preschool universal starting at
4 years old.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
We have to make it easier to be
good workers,
good parents, and good
caregivers, all at
the same time.
LISA DESJARDINS: This is further
than Clinton
went just two years ago on
mandatory paid
leave, when she told CNN it was
too soon politically.
But now things have changed.
Both presidential nominees are
pushing for
paid family leave at the same
time, and perhaps
with good reason.
Polling shows that paid family
leave gets
the support of over 70 percent
of Americans
over age 40, and that's the same
group that
has the highest turnout in
elections.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
GWEN IFILL: The latest national
polls show
a tightening in the race to the
White House,
especially in key states like
Ohio and Florida.
But when it comes down to it,
winning in November
will depend on which candidate
has a viable
path to 270 electoral votes.
For more, we're joined by John
Brabender,
Republican strategist and chief
creative officer
for BrabenderCox, a political
media firm,
and Bill Burton, former deputy
White House
press secretary under President
Obama and
currently California managing
director for
SKDKnickerbocker.
John Brabender, give us a map,
give us a tour
of what it takes for Donald
Trump to get to
270.
JOHN BRABENDER, Republican
Strategist: Well,
I'm going to oversimplify it
GWEN IFILL: OK.
JOHN BRABENDER: You first start
by winning
every state Mitt Romney won.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Is that possible?
JOHN BRABENDER: The tough one,
probably, if
there is one, it's probably
North Carolina.
That will be a battleground.
That doesn't get you anywhere
near 270, because
Mitt Romney wasn't anywhere near
270.
So, there's two different paths
you can go.
You win a whole bunch of small
states and
cobble them together, which is
almost impossible.
To me, the logical path then is
where could
have Romney maybe have won and
didn't?
And you look at Ohio, Florida.
You're still not there.
Now you have got to win either
Pennsylvania
or Michigan.
And I think Pennsylvania is
probably a little
bit more doable than Michigan,
but, again,
neither one of those states have
the Republicans
won since 1988.
GWEN IFILL: Bill Burton, take
that map and
add what you would think that
Hillary Clinton
needs to get to 270.
BILL BURTON, Former Deputy White
House Press
Secretary: Well, I think you
start in the
same place.
You look at the states Obama won
and wonder,
well, where would Hillary
Clinton have a problem
and where does Donald Trump have
problems?
And the truth is, Donald Trump
is not showing
strength in any of the big
states that he
would need in order to actually
get to 270.
And Hillary Clinton is showing
herself to
be remarkably stable in all the
states that
she needs.
So I think that Florida, Ohio,
Michigan, Pennsylvania,
all those states actually look
pretty good
for Hillary Clinton right now.
And while Donald Trump is
showing some strength
in places like Iowa, it's just
not enough
to get him close to getting the
electoral
votes that he needs to win.
GWEN IFILL: John Brabender, we
know that he
did incredibly well in the
primaries.
We didn't expect Donald Trump to
do as well
as he did.
Can he use that megaphone or
alter it in some
way to have it apply in the
general election?
JOHN BRABENDER: I think to some
degree.
Pennsylvania is a good example.
He won every one of the 67
counties.
Pennsylvania might be a
parochial state, but
it's not a homogeneous state.
So, even among just Republican
voters, to
be able to pull that off, when
you have very
moderate voters on one side of
the state and
more conservative in the middle,
shows that
he has very, very broad support.
The second thing, in fairness to
the Trump
people, if you look at the most
recent numbers,
they're actually doing well in
Ohio, winning,
winning in a lot of polls in
Florida, and
now Pennsylvania and Michigan
have both tightened.
They're not ahead, but they have
tightened.
And that's a good trend.
GWEN IFILL: Bill Burton, one of
the things
that Democrats say is that
Donald Trump gets
a lot of free media and that
that's a disadvantage
for Hillary Clinton.
Can the free media lift him to
where he needs
to be?
Isn't that a potential threat to
her?
BILL BURTON: Well, I do have to
give their
campaign a little bit of credit.
Monica Langley has a great piece
in The Wall
Street Journal today about how
they're trying
to create different kinds of
moments for Donald
Trump, as opposed to just him
shouting at
rallies.
They're trying to get him in
classrooms, and
in churches, and in diners and
places where
he can make a more personal
connection.
Now, obviously, the strategy has
its setbacks,
as you saw today, Donald Trump
in a church
getting interrupted by the
pastor because
he started attacking Hillary
Clinton.
But I think that if he does
really want to
make gains, if he does want to
find a path
to those voters who are in the
middle, then
he needs to do different things
than just
do these rallies.
And, you know, I think he's
actually doing
a pretty good job of that.
He's still pretty limited in the
effect that
he can have because he so
disqualified himself
with such a large number of
voters that I
don't think that there is an
actual a path
to victory for him.
But he is at least doing a
better -- engaging
in a better strategy than he had
previously.
GWEN IFILL: But, John, isn't
there a reason
for that?
That we see him in a church in
Detroit, Michigan
not a state that he's
necessarily competing
in, that we see him bring forth
the child
care program, isn't that to try
to address
the issues that Bill Burton is
talking about?
JOHN BRABENDER: Well, I think
what it's to
do is to make him more likable.
Here's the biggest problem I
think Donald
Trump has.
He's not getting enough votes
today of the
people who already say they
don't like Hillary
Clinton.
And so I agree with Bill.
I agree with the pastor.
I don't think Donald Trump has
to be out there
making the case against Hillary
Clinton.
I think people have known her 24
years.
How you feel about her, you feel
about her.
What they're still unsure about,
particularly
some moderate Republicans, we
know gender
there is difference, I think
Donald Trump
has to seal the deal by letting
people feel
comfortable to vote for him.
GWEN IFILL: Bill, you used to
work with David
Plouffe, who ran the Obama
campaign.
And he said that -- I think it
was yesterday
-- he said this depends on who's
showing up,
the composition of the voters
that everyone
is fighting for.
What do you think the
composition has to be
in order for Hillary Clinton to
win?
BILL BURTON: Well, something
that is interesting
about the current polling is
that, as you
watch Hillary's numbers
fluctuate, part of
the reason that they are is
because the Obama
coalition, younger voters,
African-American
voters, Latino voters, they're
not showing
up in as large a number for her
as they did
for President Obama.
And for that reason, I actually
think that
her numbers are artificially
low.
I think that, at the end of the
day, those
voters are going to join ranks,
and it is
going to help propel Hillary
Clinton to victory.
GWEN IFILL: We have seen -- I'm
going to stay
with you for a moment, Bill,
because we have
seen in the last few days a big
debate over
the deplorables comment that
Hillary Clinton
made the other night.
And I wonder if part of that
debate isn't
about this very issue.
How do you win over the people
either who
are offended by portions of the
Trump coalition,
or how does Trump, in turn, tar
her as being
intolerant?
Isn't that about part of this?
BILL BURTON: I think that that
conversation
is happening along the edges.
I don't think that the folks who
are in the
middle look at the conversation
over whether
or not Donald Trump's campaign
is racist or
whether or not Hillary Clinton
should use
that term to describe some of
his supporters
made sense, I don't think that
the folks in
the middle are looking at that
debate.
I think they're more looking at
these two
candidates.
It's a band of voters with which
neither candidate
has very high approval ratings.
And they're trying to make up
their mind on
who has a better plan for the
economy, whose
presidency would more positively
impact my
life?
And I think that debate happens
sort of among
people who have already made up
their minds.
GWEN IFILL: What do you think
about that,
John Brabender?
JOHN BRABENDER: Well, I agree.
Sometimes, we all go on these
shows and we
have this debate over
deplorable, not deplorable.
And that's not what people
around their dining
room table are talking about at
night.
One of the things Trump has done
is tie into
particularly what would be the
sons and daughters
of Reagan Democrats in places
like Ohio, Pennsylvania,
Wisconsin, Michigan, who are
voting for him
because they feel both parties
left them on
the economic battlefield.
They feel Washington doesn't
understand their
lives anymore, and they feel
that even though
Donald Trump might make a
mistake with what
he says from time to time, they
see that as
authenticity and maybe somebody
who will truly
pay attention to them, because
they feel ignored.
GWEN IFILL: And there are,
briefly, enough
of those people to get 270 for
Donald Trump?
JOHN BRABENDER: Well, here's the
thing.
In a state like Pennsylvania,
the paradox
is, to win, you have to get the
conservative
Democrats in the west, but you
still have
to do well with the
collar-county moderates
in the east.
Romney did fine with the
moderates, but not
the conservative Democrats.
Trump is doing well with the
conservative
Democrats.
Now Trump has to seal the deal
with the moderates
in the east.
GWEN IFILL: Fifty-six days,
guys.
John Brabender, Bill Burton,
thank you both
very much.
BILL BURTON: Thank you.
JOHN BRABENDER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Uber debuts self-driving
cars; manmade noise disturbing
the ocean's
wildlife; and restoring federal
education
grants for prisoners.
But, first: Today on Capitol
Hill, a Senate
hearing looked into ending the
practice overseas
of child marriage.
But what wasn't examined
thousands of American
girls and women here in the
United States
who are forced into marriage
every year.
In the first of two parts,
special correspondent
Gayle Tzemach Lemmon reports.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: For Nina
Van Harn, raising
her children today is a radical
departure
from her own upbringing.
NINA VAN HARN, Michigan: My
childhood was
part magical, and part
complicated.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: She was
raised in rural
Michigan on a 40-acre farm in a
tight-knit
community that practiced a
conservative form
of evangelical Christianity.
Its members largely kept to
themselves, more
"Little House on the Prairie"
than modern-day
America.
Growing up, she always knew one
day was coming.
She recorded its arrival in her
diary.
NINA VAN HARN: "Dear Kit (ph)"
-- that was
the name of the girl in the
journal -- "You
will never guess what happened
today.
This morning after breakfast,
papa sat Naomi
(ph) and I down at the kitchen
table and nailed
us both with a load of bricks.
He believes he found husbands
for both of
us."
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: Van Harn
had turned
19.
She was legally an adult.
There was no gun to her head, no
chains around
her wrists.
But because of lifelong
pressures from her
family and her upbringing, she
considers herself
one of thousands of American
women and girls
forced into marriage each year.
NINA VAN HARN: I knew that I
wasn't going
to say no.
This was God's will.
God had spoken.
And it was just not even an
option.
I didn't think consciously in my
head I'm
being forced.
CRISTINA BICCHIERI, University
of Pennsylvania:
This is part of, if you will,
psychological
manipulation.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: Cristina
Bicchieri is
a professor of philosophy and
psychology at
the University of Pennsylvania
whose work
focuses on social norms.
She says these marriage
practices are more
typical of close-knit,
conservative communities,
people with little contact to
the outside
world.
CRISTINA BICCHIERI: Your choices
are much
more restricted, and also it is
the case that
even if the girl or the boy give
their consent,
it is force in the sense that
only they don't
know or conceive of an
alternative, but it
is a terrifying thing to abandon
their community.
It's scary.
Where do they go?
Whom do they talk to?
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: For Nina
Van Harn, there
was no one and nowhere to go.
And then it was her wedding day.
NINA VAN HARN: I do remember
being very nervous,
and yet knowing that I needed to
be smiling,
and I was supposed to be happy.
And I just looked in the mirror
and I thought,
this is it.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: Nina's
husband wasn't
physically abusive, but
throughout over a
decade marriage, she says that
she suffered
psychological abuse, under
severe pressure
from her family and community.
Every household chore, every
meal she cooked,
every family visit, even sexual
interaction,
she said, came to feel like
imprisonment.
NINA VAN HARN: When you don't
consent willingly
to be with someone, then
acquiesce their requests,
it doesn't make it a yes.
It makes it, hey, I want to
survive today.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: An
attorney for her
husband after an initial
response to "PBS
NewsHour" didn't respond to
further inquiries,
and her father didn't respond to
multiple
contact attempts.
Numbers are hard to come by.
But one recent study by a group
that works
against forced marriage found as
many 3,000
cases in a two-year period.
Legally, marriage is between two
adults, age
18 years or older.
But every state in the country
allows for
exceptions.
Critics say these exceptions
endanger young
people, not help them.
Advocates say children as young
as 12 have
been married with the consent of
their parents,
according to state data.
Ten states also allow underage
girls to be
married if they become pregnant.
But critics point out that those
laws may
actually be used to legitimize
other crimes,
such as rape.
In a first-of-its-kind lawsuit,
Nina Van Harn
decided to sue the state of
Michigan for an
annulment on the grounds that
her marriage
wasn't consensual, and was, in
fact, based
on compulsion.
With no legal precedent in the
matter, she
had to build the case from
scratch.
She left her husband and moved
to a nearby
city, where she now lives a much
less conservative
lifestyle.
The rest of her family ceased
all contact.
And she and her former spouse
share joint
custody of their three children.
The case, she said, took on a
deep personal
significance.
NINA VAN HARN: I felt just a
sense that I
was going to actually not only
get away from
him, but I was going to get
free.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: That's
what an annulment
meant to you?
NINA VAN HARN: Uh-huh.
It meant freedom.
And it meant a peace in my
conscience.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: When you
look at these
pictures, what goes through your
mind?
FRAIDY REISS, Unchained at Last:
It's like
looking at a different person.
It's like looking at a stranger.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: Fraidy
Reiss felt similar
pressures in a very different
place.
She grew up in an ultra-orthodox
Jewish family
in Brooklyn, and she says that
the pressure
she faced to get married was
obvious.
Even though she was legally an
adult, 19 years
old, she said felt she had no
choice.
FRAIDY REISS: You have never
been on a date
before.
And your whole life, you have
been told, you
need to get married right away.
You're terrified.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: Reiss
Reiss was arranged
to marry a man whom she'd barely
met.
She remembers the ceremony as a
joyous time,
but she says her marriage took a
turn for
the worse.
FRAIDY REISS: He would describe
to me how
he was going to kill me.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: In detail.
FRAIDY REISS: In detail.
He would describe to me in
detail until my
-- he would explain how I was
going to take
my last breath.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: The
threats prompted
Reiss to seek a restraining
order in a New
Jersey state court, which was
granted in 2010,
and remains in force.
Divorce is considered sinful in
Reiss' community,
and family and friends offered
little sympathy.
On her own, she decided to take
action.
FRAIDY REISS: My first plan was,
I'm just
going to get out of this
marriage, and then
it became, I'm going to get out
of this entire
situation.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: Reiss left
the community,
and set out for what she
considered the unknown.
Her family felt so betrayed, in
fact, that
they cut off all contact.
Professor Bicchieri says Reiss'
decision to
leave puts her in a rare
category.
CRISTINA BICCHIERI: Let's call
this woman
a trendsetter.
It will show to other women --
or it may not
be a woman -- can be a man, et
cetera -- that
it is possible to act against
the norm of
the community, is an example.
They have more propensity to
risk.
They are more autonomous.
And another important element is
that they
must believe that their
rebelling in some
sense will be efficacious, that
they will
succeed.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: Reiss
moved to New Jersey
with her two daughters.
Her ex-husband retains some
visitation rights
to the girls.
Reiss started a nonprofit called
Unchained
at Last that lobbies to enact
tighter legislation
addressing forced marriage
across the United
States.
FRAIDY REISS: When people hear
about this,
they say, oh, well, that's just
happening
in this one religion, or that's
just happening
in this one immigrant community.
And that's a way to abdicate
responsibility.
It's so important to raise
awareness about
this and to talk about this
publicly, because
you can't solve a problem that
nobody knows
exists.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: Back in
Michigan, Nina
Van Harn and her lawyer, Matt
Burns, pushed
ahead with their legal battle.
The challenges, they say, are
not just legal,
but cultural.
MATTHEW BURNS, Attorney for Nina
Van Harn:
The goal isn't to eradicate
arranged marriage.
In many cultures, that is the
norm, and it's
accepted, and -- but there's, I
think, a fine
line and probably a fair gray
area between
what's arranged and what's
forced.
And so that's, I think, another
difficulty
that we face here.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: While not
confronted
with physical abuse, Van Harn
overcame great
psychological hurdles in
building her case.
NINA VAN HARN: When I walked
out, I didn't
just walk out on this person.
I walked out of my whole family.
I walked out of my community.
I walked out on many parts of
what had been
my faith.
And I had to run very fast.
And that was heart-wrenching
thing to do.
But I did it because staying was
more frightening
than leaving.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: Now she
hopes that this
case will help other women from
all backgrounds
escape similar situations.
Meanwhile, she has a steady job
in human resources
at an auto dealer.
She leads an active, busy
family.
And she has built a new group of
friends,
many of whom she met at a
support group sponsored
by a local women's shelter.
NINA VAN HARN: It's a community.
We are a community that works
together to
help each other through life.
We are, in some ways,
co-parents.
And that's my family.
And they mean everything to me.
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON: On August
1, Nina Van
Harn's husband agreed to annul
their marriage.
The end of this case, she hopes,
also will
mark a whole new a beginning for
her.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Gayle Tzemach
Lemmon in Michigan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow, part
two of our series,
looking at American girls taken
overseas and
forced into marriage.
And, online, Gayle Tzemach
Lemmon describes
how she was able to persuade her
subjects
to come forward.
That's on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: Now: The Jetsons
future may be
arriving sooner than you think,
for better
or for worse.
Uber is experimenting with
self-driving cars.
In Pittsburgh today, the company
began deploying
a small test fleet of the
vehicles around
the city.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK, the first
thing to know,
Uber tried this with several
journalists this
week.
Each self-driving car was
accompanied by a
human operator, who loosely kept
hands on
the steering wheel.
The cars are equipped with
sensors, radars
and light-mapping systems.
Select Uber customers in
Pittsburgh will be
able to opt into a driverless
car pickup.
Alex Davies writes about all
things transportation
for "Wired" magazine, and took a
ride in one
of Uber's self-driving cars.
He joins me now from San
Francisco.
So, Alex, unless you were a
friend of a Tesla
driver or a Google engineer,
you're one of
the first people to sit in the
back of one
of these cars.
What was the experience like?
ALEX DAVIES, "Wired": So, for
the most part,
it was actually kind of just
like a regular
Uber ride, minus the fact that
it was clearly
a kind of carefully orchestrated
media preview.
It's same way most Uber rides
start.
You pull out your phone, you
open up the Uber
app, and you hit -- enter your
destination.
Then you call up the car.
And then what's going to happen
from now on
for some select customers in
Pittsburgh is,
it will say, hey, would you like
a self-driving
car, instead of some guy driving
in the street
who's trying to make extra
money?
And if you hit yes, then that's
what shows
up.
And basically a car -- right
now, they're
now using Ford Fusions covered
in this enormous
pile of sensors on the roof,
spinning light
scanners, radars, cameras.
That pulls up.
But after that, once you get in,
it works
more or less like a normal Uber.
You relax in the back seat and
the car drives
you exactly where you're going.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, we
mentioned the biggest
safety precaution, which has
been a human,
an engineer, a driver in the
car.
But what other kinds of
precautions has Uber
taken to roll this test out?
ALEX DAVIES: So, first of all,
they're only
operating within a small select
area of downtown
Pittsburgh.
They're open to about 12 square
miles right
now.
And the reason they're limited
to that space
is that they will only send
their cars out
to areas that they have mapped
in extreme
detail.
That means that the car already
knows exactly
where every traffic light is.
It knows which lanes are
right-turn-only lanes,
which -- where it's allowed to
make a U-turn
or where it can't, what the
speed limit is
everywhere, and where
pedestrians are likely
to cross, where cars are usually
driving if
the lane lanes aren't super
well-marked.
So, basically, it's kind of
slicing off the
riskier areas by only operating
in places
where it knows what the
conditions are going
to be like.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, why
Pittsburgh?
ALEX DAVIES: A couple of
reasons.
The biggest one is that
Pittsburgh is home
to Carnegie Mellon, which has --
Carnegie
Mellon has one of the best
robotics programs
in the country and probably in
the world.
And some of their engineers have
been studying
self-driving cars for 15 years
now, well before
anybody imagined that this could
really be
a thing.
So, a lot of those guys and
women are now
working for Uber at its Advanced
Technology
Center in the city.
The second reason is that Uber
has -- sorry
-- Pittsburgh has a lot of
different weather
conditions, unlike Silicon
Valley, which is
pretty much always sunny.
Pittsburgh, you're going to have
to face snow
and rain and different weather
problems.
And that's a good challenge for
the cars to
learn how to solve.
And the street grid isn't the
easiest to navigate.
So, again, it's training cars to
take on more
complicated situations.
The third advantage to
Pittsburgh is that
Pennsylvania hasn't really
regulated this
space yet, so Uber is free to do
pretty much
what it wants.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What is the
safety record
of autonomous vehicles to date,
and how is
Uber factoring that in to these
tests?
ALEX DAVIES: So, overall, the
safety record
is excellent, because, for the
most part,
at least when you're talking
about fully autonomous
vehicles, they have always got a
man -- a
trained operator at the wheel
ready to take
over in any situation.
So, for example, Google, which
tests constantly
in Mountain View and in Austin
and a few other
places, has had a few minor
accidents, but
nothing serious, nothing where
anyone's ever
been injured.
And the same thing with Uber, at
least in
California, where it's required
to report
any accidents, as are all
autonomous car operators.
In Pennsylvania, it's not
exactly clear what
the record is, though they say
they haven't
had any accidents, just because
there are
no rules saying they have to
tell you if there
is one.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
And, also, put this into
perspective.
Why is Uber doing this?
We have heard about Google.
We have heard about Tesla.
We have heard about auto
manufacturers.
What's Uber's interest in having
autonomous
vehicles?
ALEX DAVIES: So, Uber's interest
is natural,
because when you ask automakers,
for example,
well, when you think about an
autonomous fleet
of cars, what does that look
like, they will
tell you, well, it looks like
Uber.
It's a car that you don't have
to own or deal
with parking or maintenance that
shows up,
picks you up and takes you where
you want
to go.
So if Uber can take its model,
which is already
enormously successful and
rapidly spreading
around the world, and it can
take out the
single most expensive part of
that, which
is a human driver who takes half
or three-quarters
of every customer's fare, and
they can remove
that person from the equation,
then, all of
a sudden, the business gets a
lot more efficient
and a lot more profitable.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK.
And how far out is that future?
ALEX DAVIES: So, Uber right now,
if you say,
well, when are you going to be
able to take
the engineers out of the cars,
they will say,
when it's safe, which is not a
particularly
helpful answer.
But if you look at the timelines
other players
have put out, Baidu, which is
kind of the
Chinese equivalent of Google,
says it wants
self-driving cars on streets in
2019.
Ford is targeting 2021.
So, I think it's safe to say
that Uber will
be more or less on that
timeline, so three
to five years out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Alex Davies from
"Wired" joining us from San
Francisco tonight,
thanks so much.
ALEX DAVIES: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's a growing
problem for
marine life in the world's
oceans and waterways,
manmade noise.
This week, the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric
Administration released a new
decade-long
plan to try to deal with the way
it's affecting
life underwater.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
has our report.
It's part of our weekly series
covering the
Leading Edge of science and
technology.
CAT WISE: Beachgoers are drawn
to the water
this time of year to relax and
enjoy some
peace and calm.
And that's what many describe
it's like under
the water, too.
WOMAN: I would say it sounds
beautiful, relaxing.
WOMAN: I think it sounds, like,
so peaceful,
like, I mean, just calm.
CAT WISE: But the calm near the
surface often
belies what it actually sounds
like deep beneath
the waves, especially if that's
where you
live.
Over the last hundred years, as
humans have
increasingly used the world's
waterways for
shipping, defense, and natural
resources,
among other things, the level
and the amount
of manmade noises in marine
environments has
increased.
But many species of mammals,
fish, and even
invertebrates rely on sound to
communicate
under the water to find food,
mates, and stay
safe.
And those vital communications,
in some areas,
are being drowned out.
MARLA HOLT, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric
Administration: People don't
really realize
how noisy it is.
Sound travels very well
underwater compared
to air.
So it can travel very long
distances.
CAT WISE: Marla Holt is a
wildlife biologist
for the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
in Seattle.
She and other NOAA scientists
have been studying
the impacts of noise pollution
on marine life
from big to small.
It's been shown that noise can
cause behavior
changes, hearing loss, and it
can even be
fatal.
Holt's research focuses on
orcas, also known
as killer whales, and how they
amplify their
calls when they are in noisy
waters, especially
around container ships.
MARLA HOLT: OK, so here are orca
calls with
minimal boat noise.
And here are their calls with
lots of boat
noise.
CAT WISE: There's quite a
difference, and
you see it visually here too.
MARLA HOLT: Yes, so, they really
have to pump
up the volume of their calls in
order to hear
each other.
CAT WISE: Many of the orcas Holt
studies spend
a lot of their time in
Washington state's
Puget Sound.
They and hundreds of other
marine species
have a lot more than just
container ships
to contend with.
More than four million people
live around
the Sound.
The beautiful waterways of Puget
Sound are
what draw so many people to this
area, but
all the boating and shoreline
development
make this a very noisy place to
be for marine
life.
It's an issue that the state of
Washington
has been trying to deal with for
quite some
time.
RHONDA BROOKS, Washington State
Department
of Transportation: Any time we
touch anything
with water, we try to deploy
practices that
aren't harmful.
CAT WISE: Rhonda Brooks is works
for the Washington
State Department of
Transportation.
She says the state's many ferry
terminals
and bridges require a lot of
work that is
often quite noisy, especially
when it comes
to driving foundation piles in
the water.
RHONDA BROOKS: I think it's only
really been
in the last decade or so that we
have become
concerned about the sound that
it makes underwater
as it's being struck from above
the water,
and what that sound does to the
species that
are not only in the vicinity of
the pile,
but also miles and miles away.
CAT WISE: While marine pile
driving is a relatively
small slice of the overall noise
pollution
problem, it is one of the
loudest and most
distressful manmade noises for
marine life.
Documented fish kills around
marine pile driving
projects in the early 2000s led
to more state
and federal noise mitigation
requirements.
One of the main ways to reduce
the noise with
pile driving has been through
the use of bubble
curtains, which are large rings
that surround
the pile, and the bubbles that
are pumped
out reduce the sound waves, but
sometimes
not very much, as little as 30
percent.
They also can cause construction
delays, according
to Brooks.
RHONDA BROOKS: As we know, time
is money in
construction.
And so we began to look at
practical, innovative
ways to attenuate that sound.
CAT WISE: So Brooks and other
transportation
officials sought help from
engineers around
the state.
And they eventually got that
help from this
man.
PER REINHALL, University of
Washington: Once
we understood the principles of
how sound
was created, then the solution
was pretty
simple.
CAT WISE: Per Reinhall is the
chair of the
mechanical engineering
department at the University
of Washington.
Over the years, he has developed
a number
of products, including a
next-generation football
helmet.
But this was his first foray in
marine construction,
and what he came up with was a
double-walled
pile.
Reinhall showed me how the
system works on
a model.
PER REINHALL: So, what we have
done is, we
have taken the ordinary pile and
then we have
put another pile inside it.
And, as you can see here,
there's an airspace
in between where the water can
not get to.
And what we do is, we strike the
inside pile.
Now we have a bulge going down.
But now it's acting against the
air, not the
water.
So, essentially, no sound, or
very little
sound gets developed.
CAT WISE: The other key part of
the design
is the connection at the bottom
of the two
piles, seen in this testing
prototype, which
prevents the sound from
traveling into the
seafloor.
PER REINHALL: And that's really
the secret
sauce of this concept, is the
flexible coupling
at the bottom.
See, it's essentially a spring,
a very, very
stiff spring, between the
outside pile and
the inside pile.
CAT WISE: Reinhall has turned
his innovation
into small start-up.
The company, called Marine
Construction Technologies,
has done several tests with the
state Department
of Transportation.
And the results, says Reinhall,
have confirmed
the design works.
At this test, done in 2014,
there was a 21-decibel
noise reduction.
To understand what that means,
you really
need to hear it.
PER REINHALL: So, this is a
regular pile.
And this is our new pile.
So, it's a dramatic difference.
CAT WISE: It is a big
difference.
How much of a difference?
PER REINHALL: It's a reduction
of about 90
percent of the volume.
CAT WISE: Ninety?
PER REINHALL: Ninety percent of
the volume,
so, yes, it's a big deal if
you're a fish.
CAT WISE: One hurdle, though, is
the cost.
The double-walled piles are
about 20 percent
more than a standard single
pile.
But Reinhall says those costs
should be mitigated
by the effectiveness of the
technology.
PER REINHALL: The goal of this
is to actually
save money, if you include
everything, if
you include monitoring, the time
of the projects,
permitting, et cetera, et
cetera.
So, overall, the projects should
be cheaper
with this technology.
CAT WISE: The Reinhall piles
have yet to be
used commercially, but the state
is now evaluating
them now for future projects.
As for the marine life in Puget
Sound, there
was no comment, but we expect
any noise reductions
in their waters would be a
welcome development.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise in Seattle,
Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes, it would.
Cat's report is also part of our
Breakthroughs
coverage of invention and
innovation.
GWEN IFILL: Next, we continue
with our Rethinking
College series.
Hari returns now with a report
on whether
taxpayers should cover college
tuition for
convicted criminals.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jermaine Isaac
(ph) killed
a man when he was 15.
He's been in prison for
second-degree murder
11 years.
During his punishment, he is
trying to make
something better of himself.
For the past two years, he has
been attending
college behind bars.
JERMAINE ISAAC, Inmate: Going to
college gave
me tools.
It's taught me patience.
It's taught me hard work.
It taught me that more things
are possible.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Isaac is one
of 100 Maryland
prisoners studying for a degree
as part of
a partnership with Goucher
College, a private
liberal arts school in
Baltimore.
Goucher provides the professors
and pays for
the education with private
donations.
Amy Roza directs the Goucher
Prison Partnership.
AMY ROZA, Director, Goucher
Prison Education
Partnership: We have a chance to
change the
way we do criminal justice in
the United States,
if we invest in the root causes
of what brings
people to prison.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When Jermaine
Isaac came
to the Maryland correctional
institution in
Jessup, he could barely read.
JERMAINE ISAAC: College was
never in a realm
for me.
It was never in sight.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, with a
GED and 16 college
credits, Isaac feels he's
getting a second
chance.
In January, he will be released.
There's going to be people
watching, thinking,
why are we giving a guy who took
somebody
else's life an opportunity and
an education?
Shouldn't he be punished in
prison?
JERMAINE ISAAC: We are the
people who are
coming back into society.
Whether they like it or not,
we're coming
back to society.
And we're trying to come back
prepared to
be citizens, and give back to
where we took
from.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This summer,
the Obama administration
said it will extend that second
chance to
12,000 inmates across the
country.
As a pilot project, the
Department of Education
will partner with 67 colleges,
including Goucher,
to provide higher education to
prisoners who
can't afford it.
Called Second Chance Pell Pilot,
eligible
inmates will be able to apply
for federal
grants.
Education Secretary John King:
JOHN KING, U.S. Education
Secretary: Students
who have the opportunity to
pursue education
while they're incarcerated are
dramatically
less likely to return to prison,
42 percent
reduction in recidivism from
students just
having exposure to education; 98
percent of
the folks who earn a bachelor's
degree don't
end up back in prison.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Advocates for
college in
prison say those statistics can
break the
link between poverty and crime.
AMY ROZA: We see huge changes in
lifetime
earnings, $8,000 more a year for
a student
who has access to some college,
$22,000 more
a year for a student who has
access to a bachelor's
degree.
All of those impacts have a deep
impact on
children.
And more than half the people we
incarcerate
in the U.S. are parents of
school-age children.
BRAD STODDARD, Goucher Prison
Education Partnership:
This case was a consolidation of
two cases.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But is the
education that
these prisoners receive
comparable to college
courses on the outside?
Professor Brad Stoddard teaches
religion and
social reform for the Goucher
Prison Education
Partnership.
BRAD STODDARD: It is the exact
same curriculum
that I do for my general
population students.
We use the same reading
material.
We use the same primary sources,
the same
secondary sources.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Until the
mid-'90s, inmates
of state and federal prisons
were allowed
to apply for Pell Grants, money
offered to
any low-income college student
in the nation.
But as part of the 1994 crime
bill, Congress
took away grant money for the
incarcerated.
Critics of Second Chance Pell
Grants say the
Department of Education is now
overstepping
its authority.
Congressman Chris Collins:
REP.
CHRIS COLLINS (R), New York:
There is a law
on the books that there is no
ambiguity in.
Pell Grants shall not be allowed
for prisoners,
period, end of discussion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: By designating
the program
an experiment, education
officials say they
can access the money and help
prisoners get
jobs upon release.
JOHN KING: We need them to come
back prepared
to be successful.
Otherwise, they will end up back
in jail,
which is a cost to -- not only
to them and
their families, but to the to
the country.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Collins says
inmates should
be trained in the trades and
helped to complete
a GED, but he stops short of
money for college.
REP.
CHRIS COLLINS: We have no
surplus.
There's no extra money anywhere
in the federal
government.
So, I do not believe our
children and grandchildren
should be paying off in the
future with interest
moneys so a criminal behind bars
can take
a few random college courses.
HARI SREENIVASAN: James Flood,
the director
of security operations for
Maryland's Department
of Correctional Services, says
classes do
more than help the individual.
They improve the environment.
JAMES FLOOD, Maryland Department
of Correctional
Services: You don't have time to
dwell on
negative things.
You're working.
You're going to school and
you're studying.
You're concentrating on positive
things.
And so we benefit as an
institution, and it
makes the facility safer.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And he says
other inmates
view those enrolled in classes
differently.
JAMES FLOOD: This is positive
peer pressure,
because it fuels admiration and
respect.
DEVAL WALLACE, Inmate: I started
college here
because I needed a change, man,
something
positive, something productive.
It was a search for achievement,
something
to better myself.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Deval Wallace
is incarcerated
for attempted murder.
He will not be eligible for
parole for another
six years.
Still, he is enrolled in Goucher
classes and
hopes to get a degree in
psychology.
DEVAL WALLACE: It still benefits
me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How?
DEVAL WALLACE: Even though I'm
not able to
go out and use a degree, just
being -- having
that knowledge and having to --
I can help
the next person that's in here
that might
have a chance of going home,
help steer him
in the right direction, give him
positive
information.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What's your
guarantee to
me that, five years from now,
when I catch
up with you, it's not going to
be in a room
like this?
JERMAINE ISAAC: I can guarantee
that because
I hate prison.
I can't be here.
Like, this is not a place for
me.
There's no way I will return
here, no way.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Department
of Education
estimates 100 correctional
institutions across
the country will take part in
the Second Chance
Pell Pilot program.
In Maryland for the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
"NewsHour" shares,
Something that caught our eye
that might be
of interest to you, too.
We visit the nation's first
lighthouse just
off Boston, which celebrates its
300th anniversary
today.
SALLY SNOWMAN, Boston Light
Keeper: My name
is Sally Snowman.
And I'm the Coast Guard
lighthouse keeper
of Boston Light.
Boston Light is the last manned
Coast Guard
life station in the entire
country.
It is located on Little Brewster
Island at
the entrance of Boston Harbor.
In 1716, there were many
shipwrecks here in
the outer harbor of Boston, and
they wanted
to have a major aid to
navigation to show
the ships safe passage into the
harbor.
And so, in 1716, Boston Light
was erected.
And then it had an incident in
1776 in the
Revolutionary War where the
tower was blown
up.
It was rebuilt in 1783, and that
is the tower
that exists today.
And, today, 300 years later, the
lighthouse
is doing exactly what it was
intended to do
in 1716, which was showing a
safe way into
Boston Harbor.
So, now I am the 70th keeper of
Boston Light,
with the first 69 having been
all men.
When I was hired in 2003, I was
a Coast Guard
auxiliary person that
volunteered out here
and wore a uniform.
However, being on the payroll
for the Coast
Guard as a civilian employee, I
wasn't allowed
to wear the uniform, and I was
asked to come
up with something that would
help me stand
out from the crowd.
So, I came up with the idea of
this costume
from the late 1700s to help tell
the story,
that it's not the original tower
of 1716.
It's 1783.
And this is what the keeper's
wife would have
worn during that period of time.
We are a living museum.
Visitors get to come out, climb
the 76 spiral
stairs, two ladders into the
lantern room,
and stand by an 11-foot crystal
made up of
336 individual prisms.
Many of them are local, many of
them from
Boston.
And so many of them say, oh, I
have lived
in Boston all of my life, I have
looked at
Boston Light, and never came
out.
And why did it take me so long
to come out
here?
Because it is a jewel.
It's a jewel of the harbor.
GWEN IFILL: Tonight, as of PBS
Spotlight Education
Week, "NOVA" takes a look at the
divides in
education across America and
potential solutions.
"School of the Future" examines
how education
could be redesigned to help
narrow the gaps
in opportunities and
achievement.
"NOVA" airs tonight on most PBS
stations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday, correspondent John
Yang checks
in from Ohio with the first of
two reports
from that battleground state.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.